almost 30 years ago I started medical
school in Edinburgh in Scotland
and I still remember sitting in the
anatomy theater being told by one of our
professors that one in four of us at
some point in our lives were going to
get cancer and I remember being shocked
this was back in 1995
I looked around thinking wow one in four
now I know as things stand today that
rate has gone up to one in two of us are
going to get cancer at some point in our
lives so Professor Seafood you've been
studying cancer for decades now in your
view what's going on
well thanks
um well you know in any kind of uh a
disastrous situation
um there's never one thing
that could be responsible uh for the
rise in in a particular disease I I
think that
um there are many factors that come
together
uh to account in part for this worldwide
epidemic of cancer
where most people uh that study
epidemiology have now uh
consider the view that it's just a
matter of time before cancer overtakes
heart disease
as the number one killer of people in
various countries so what's going on uh
when you consider
that are ancestral uh groups of people
um cancer was extremely rare in uh in
tribes and and and different populations
that live by their standard ways
uh ways that were common to those folks
for for centuries all of a sudden now we
have this explosion within the last say
50 or 70 years an explosion of of Cancer
and a lot of it has to do with our
Western Civilization diet and lifestyle
we have more contaminants in the
atmosphere we have less exercise and we
have far more foods that are poorly
nutritious and provide uh high amounts
of carbohydrates I I think you put all
this together because there's a direct
correlation between the Obesity epidemic
and cancer a correlation between the
Obesity epidemic cancer and type 2
diabetes you put all this together
Alzheimer's disease all these chronic
diseases are on a increased trajectory
so clearly it's linked to a change in
diet and lifestyle over the last uh 50
to 70 years where we're really starting
to see this this increase even even when
we said the anti-smoking campaign here
in the United States in the in the in
the 1990s you know smoking was a major
cause of lung cancer and other cancers
but now with the uh reduction of smoking
we're still seeing this Relentless
increase and obesity now is replacing
smoking is the num as a number one or a
major risk factor for the development of
cancer so I think it's a lot of factors
coming together uh increasing our
susceptibility to developing tumors in
various uh organ systems
yes really interesting
one of the ways in which we get trained
as Western Medical Doctors of course is
that
these different diagnoses these
different illnesses are completely
different diseases right we say things
like oh you know this increases your
risk of type 2 diabetes and if you have
type 2 diabetes it increases your risk
of another condition called Alzheimer's
disease and what's really interesting
hearing you talk about what's happened
in the last well my question was the
last 20 30 years but you broadened it
out to 50 to 70 years
is that it's not just cancer that's
going up as you say we know that chronic
disease is going up type 2 diabetes is
going up Alzheimer's is going up cancer
is going up and I know you have very
much been trying to get the message
across to people for many decades now
that cancer is a metabolic disease so
clearly these things are not quite a
separate as they might initially seem
that's absolutely right and and
um metabolic homeostasis uh which is the
uh
absolute functioning of our cells in the
appropriate way organ cells it's called
metabolic homeostasis when you're
basically a very healthy person you're
in metabolic homeostasis so what's
happening is our bodies are falling out
of metabolic homeostasis as the result
of a variety of insults from uh from
largely from from the environment diet
and lifestyle and these kinds of things
but when you look back and say what is
what is uh what is responsible for
maintaining what in metabolic
homeostasis and it comes back to our
mitochondria within the cells
um the organelle that uh ultimately is
responsible for the metabolic
homeostasis within individual cells and
within the body as a whole
so this organelle when it becomes
corrupted or dysfunctional can manifest
can Manifest this problem in in many
different ways cardiovascular disease
type 2 diabetes cancer uh Alzheimer's
disease depending on the on the tissue
and the cells of the individual and
cancer we we know for sure that
um every major cancer that I have
studied has defects the number structure
and function of the of the mitochondria
and this then causes the cells to fall
back on a on a primitive form of energy
which is fermentation and that leads to
dysregulated cell growth so we have I I
have a very clear idea of the origin of
cancer and how to manage it
um the ramifications of these two say
other chronic diseases we always find a
mitochondrial connection it may not be
always the same as what we see in cancer
yeah well let's just go
initially to something you you you
mentioned at the start of this
conversation which is when we look at
these kind of indigenous populations we
don't see cancer
now some people may be thinking
okay but how much are we
you know examining these people how much
are we scanning these people so do we
know for sure that actually they don't
have rates of cancer or is it just that
we haven't found it so I wonder if you
could just address that right at the top
yeah well that's a good question but um
when when we read the the work of
um the humanitarian physician Albert
Schweitzer uh he he definitely knew what
cancer was he examined 40 000 Africans
and living in their natural ways looking
for cancer and he didn't find it so uh
so he absolutely knew in other cases
with the in Inuits of Alaska and the
Arctic Circle some
um British Physicians reported that
cancer was very very rare but I don't
think it was done as comprehensively as
what Albert Schweitzer did in the
African populations but others have
looked as well and they kind of con uh
concur what Schweitzer had seen in
general uh human populations that lived
according to traditional ways had a much
lower incidence of cancer than those
same populations that shifted to diet
lifestyle for example the Inuits I I had
the opportunity to visit the medical
school at Thunder Bay Canada uh where
they uh they uh service the the medical
problems of the Canadian Inuit
population and the Inuits now are are
raked with uh diabetes cancer dementia
uh which their ancestral populations
never had so
um clearly it's the change in diet and
lifestyle that's largely responsible for
the onset of these chronic diseases
including cancer
I've heard you say in a previous
interview that our bodies are actually
very resistant to cancer
and I've been thinking about that a lot
over the past few days that despite all
the insults that are coming into our
bodies especially these days
although the rates are high you could
make the case that the rate should be
even higher so I guess when you say our
bodies are incredibly resistant to
cancer what do you kind of mean by that
well I I think
um uh
when we live traditional lives like the
Primitive folks and traditional
ancestral groups
not getting cancer or having very low uh
rates of cancer
um I think when we have the right diet
and lifestyle I I think it becomes much
more difficult for cancer uh to develop
and a kind of an example of this was the
there was a study done some years ago
um with with uh I think they were
macaque some sort of a monkey from South
America or one of these places
and they rubbed carcinogen they 20
methyl chlanthrines is a known
carcinogen and and they rubbed it on the
arms of these monkeys uh for 10 years
inject them with it and everything else
and they didn't get a single case of
cancer uh from from these and they
concluded that well these monkeys are
not good models for cancer
um but the monkeys were eating their
their diet they were living in their
natural environment
um and they were quite resistant the con
the the alternative experiment which was
never done is why don't we give these
monkeys uh High carbohydrate diets uh
really changed their diet and lifestyle
and then do these kinds of experiments
and and I think that members of our
ancestral groups uh uh having the
correct exercise diet and lifestyle even
even when exposed to carcinogens would
have a much lower risk so when you take
folks that are now uh not exercising
getting obese uh you have you have them
exposed to a variety of chemicals within
the Food Systems the type of poor
nutrition I think you even though we
have a lot of resistance in our body to
cancer right we're really we're really
bashing down those walls of resistance
by the diet Lifestyles that we're taking
yeah
I really like that example because I
think it goes
Beyond cancer for me into all these
chronic diseases we can scare ourselves
these days if we go online if we read
about the toxins the pollutants the air
pollution the diesel fumes that you know
it can be really really scary to think
well what can I do I'm going to be
exposed to so much of this but what you
just explained there is really the
approach I take with myself and with my
patients which is very much okay well
what can you do okay what are the things
you have control over what can you do in
your own house and the more good things
you can do
the more of a buffer you create the more
strong these foundations become to then
resist the attack and the onslaught from
the modern worlds as someone who's been
studying cancer for decades now do you
think that's a kind of fair analogy
oh I think it's a really good analogy I
I think I I think uh but it's hard you
know it is hard uh uh we we are
confronted now
um with food sources in abundance
uh our our exercise levels are far far
lower than they than they were uh when
we evolved as a species
um you know this this whole way we live
sitting in traffic in front of computers
um with minimal exercise
chowing down on on on poorly nutritious
High carbohydrate Foods I mean over
years you know little kids kids can do
this uh because your body is strong and
healthy but man you do that for 30 years
and it just it just you know it crushes
you down yeah um and so it's it's a
combination of all these exposures and
the lifestyle that we have and it's it
cuts across
um
racial and and different groups I mean
clearly it's it's a common it once that
Western diet lifestyle enters into a
population all of a sudden you see the
onset of these chronic diseases it's
very clear so so that never existed yeah
previous so you can know you know what
it is but what in the diet and lifestyle
specifically is responsible for one of
these chronic diseases you know as you
said they're they're all Linked In One
Way or Another and that one and that
linkage in my mind has to do with the
way we generate energy within ourselves
and
um uh the consequences of what happens
uh to the body through this chronic
assault year in and year out decade in
decade out
yeah we're going to get into the details
here because I think it's really
important and I think
certainly for long time listeners of my
podcast
I think
I hope there's there's a real awareness
that actually the way we live our lives
the choices we make the the behaviors we
engage with each and every day over time
they build up and they increase our risk
or decrease our risk of getting sick in
the future but we haven't spoken about
cancer that much on the show so far
which is one of the reasons why I wanted
to speak to you and I think you've
already so far spoken about Concepts
that people are familiar with but
possibly not familiar with when looking
at cancer what I mean by that is
just as type 2 diabetes doesn't happen
overnight you don't just wake up one
morning go to the doctor get your hba1c
at 6.8 and go oh wow what I don't know
what happened I I've just got type 2
diabetes no things were going on in your
life for maybe five to ten years that
was building up building up building up
and now you've crossed that threshold
can we say cancer adopts a
a similar kind of model that you know
you get the diagnosis at some point but
things have been building up for a
period of time I wonder if you could
just expand on that and help us
understand how one actually develops it
in the first place
yeah well you're right about that I mean
it doesn't happen you don't you don't
wake you don't go to sleep uh looking
healthy at night wake up with a big
tumor on on your lung or your kidney or
something like this I mean the these
these things when you have something
that can be obvious now and detected uh
um by
um you know uh pathology pathological
report or non-invasive Imaging I mean
there's got to be a large number of
dysregulated cells in that mass uh
before you actually uh see it uh with
with some diagnostic tool
um but you know when I when I wrote my
book on cancer Albert sent Yorkie uh who
was a Nobel Prize recipient did work on
vitamin C he called he called this
cancer thing the uh an oncogenic Paradox
how is it possible that so many
different provocative agents uh could
could elicit this a dysregulated group
of cells in a particular organ or
um part of the body in a in a common way
what is the common pathophysiological
connection
uh among all the provocative agents like
we know carcinogens they call chemicals
that cause cancer as carcinogen this is
a chemical that has been been determined
to uh cause cancer so we refer to these
chemicals as carcinogens we also know
that we have certain viral infections
like hepatitis C papilloma viruses and
some of these other kinds of cars uh
carcinogenic viruses they produce cancer
we also know radiation can produce
cancer we also know that chronic
inflammation can produce cancer we know
that intermittent hypoxia can produce
cancer in certain cells what is the
common pathophysiological mechanism by
which all this happens we know that
there are certain uh inherited genes in
our body these are called secondary risk
they're not primary risk factors but
they in the right environment they they
will list said cancer like the leaf Frau
many syndrome you have the bracha 1
mutations for breast cancer so a woman
might get breast cancer for her having a
bracket one mutation they might get
breast cancer from a clogged milk duct
they may get cancer from systemic
inflammation but when you look at it
under the microscope the pathological
report they say oh you have breast
cancer so what was the origin why one
woman why all these women that would
have various guides they might all have
different provocative agents that
elicited uh the the common patent what
the common pathophysiological mechanism
mechanism is to all cancers is a chronic
disruption of energy metabolism in the
mitochondria of the cell followed by a
compensatory fermentation now let me
break that down because this is what
Otto Warburg initially said he just
didn't connect all the dots like we have
he he said cancer elicits from chronic
damage to the ability of a cell to
generate energy from oxygen so we know
that all of the cells in our body use
oxygen to generate ATP which is the
currency of energy in our body adenosine
triphosphate okay so you and I are
breathing we're talking uh because the
air that we breathe in has oxygen in it
oxygen serves as a the acceptor of
electrons
which allows the mitochondria to produce
a vast amounts of of energy and the
waste products are CO2 and water of
oxidative phosphorylation all of our
cells in our body the majority of cells
except red blood cells are using this
process so that we can remain alive what
happens in the cancer cell over time
that organelle that process becomes
corrupted or deficient in some way but
the but as warrenberg said if you
disrupt oxidative phosphorylation or
energy through oxygen too acutely the
cell will die and you'll never get a
cancer from a dead cell so whatever
causes the cancer whatever the
provocative agent does it doesn't do it
acutely it does it chronically and by
chronic disruption of oxidative
phosphorylation it allows the cell to to
replace oxidative phosphorylation with
the ancient Pathways of fermentation the
fermentation Pathways is energy without
oxygen and all the cells on our planet
existed uh in using fermentation before
oxygen came into the atmosphere and that
was about 2.5 billion years ago so the
cancer cell adapts to a fermentation
metabolism as a way to compensate for
the chronic disruption of oxidative
phosphorylation interestingly enough
that same organelle the mitochondria
controls the cell cycle it allows the
cell to remain in a quiescent
differentiated State and as that
organelle becomes corrupted over time
the transition to fermentation
causes the cell to lapse into the
default state which is proliferation so
in this in this all of the cells on our
planet uh were highly proliferative
disregulated cell growth before oxygen
came into the atmosphere to form
metazones and more complicated complex
uh organisms so the cancer cell is doing
nothing more than falling back on
Ancient pathway living in the living as
if it were in the absence of oxygen and
that's what cancer cells do they can
absolutely survive without oxygen they
don't use oxygen anymore so they're
living without oxygen anaerobosis says
Warburg called it their life without
oxygen even when oxygen is present the
cancer cell is the cancer cell is still
fermenting so now you know what this
cell is yeah it's so interesting so
let's just unpack a little bit of what
you just said first of all you said that
I guess or my interpretation is that
there are infinite numbers of insults
that we can have on the human body and
with respect to cancer it can be from
pollution from radiation from you know
whatever it might be we can have these
insults but whatever those insults are
for us to get a diagnosis of cancer
there is a specific abnormality in
mitochondrial function which occurs and
at that point the cancer cell is no
longer utilizing oxygen to make energy
it's doing it using fermentation
products and you're saying that so so
if we go down that logic is it fair to
say then that cancer is not really the
diagnosis cancer is a symptom it's a
symptom of problems in the mitochondria
yes exactly you're actually right and
then Warburg had said this and at that
time he only knew about glucose
fermentation lactic acid fermentation
because ATP synthesis through oxidative
phosphorylation is highly highly
efficient so you can generate 30 32 to
36 ATP molecules for one mole of oxygen
consumed but fermentation is a very
inefficient system so what is the raw
material to generate fermentation yes
glucose but uh but the glucose can only
generate a couple of ATP relative to the
vast number from oxidative
phosphorylation so in order to make up
the difference in energy you have to
take in massive amounts of glucose to in
order to replace the energy that you
would have gotten from uh that the cell
would have received from oxidative
phosphorylation so consequently the
Transporters for the the sugar glucose
are massively upregulated on the surface
of cancer cells and this is one of the
reasons why you can Tech tumors using
position of pet scanning
positron emission tomography you can you
can you can see cancer because it's
sucking down so much so much uh glucose
um but what we have found and Warburg
did not know
um we have also discovered that these
same tumor cells also ferment the amino
acid glutamine so they can they can use
glutamine in the absence of oxygen in a
fermentation mechanism so the two fuels
the glucose and the glutamine are the
two predominantly the predominant fuels
for fermentation so uh once you know
this once you know that these tumor
cells are dependent on uh non-oxidative
energy which is called fermentation
energy without oxygen what what
generates listen without energy nothing
can grow period energy is absolutely
essential for life so if the cancer cell
is using a different type of energy
metabolism what is it it's fermentation
wow okay great what are the fuels that
are driving the fermentation well one of
them is glucose as Warburg said and the
other one is glutamine as we have now
found as the second major fermentable
fuel in these tumor cells and these two
fuels work together driving all of the
necessary processes for Rapid
development rapid proliferation and for
um it's the constant dysregulated
dysregulated growth DNA RNA protein
synthesis the glutamine has the nitrogen
and carbons to make new DNA and RNA the
glucose has the carbons the fatty acids
and proteins and these two fuels are
driving the Beast and once you
understand then the other thing you need
to know is that they can only use
fermentable fuels fatty acids and Ketone
bodies are non-fermentable fuels they're
not they cannot be used by tumor cells
but they're they can be used by normal
cells that have normal mitochondria so
the solution to the cancer problem is
simultaneously targeting the ferment
fermentation metabolism of the cells
which is the glucose and glutamine but
by transitioning the body over over to
Ketone bodies which allows the normal
cells in the brain and all the organs to
to function and fatty acids for the
liver through our cells can't use fatty
acids and Ketone bodies so the solution
is a cancer problem is very simple you
have to simultaneously Target the
fermentation while transitioning the
body over to fuels that cannot be
fermented and this now puts massive
pressure and kills the tumor cells
without toxicity wow I mean it's so
clear when you when you say it like that
because like if you were not MediCal
right
if you knew nothing about cancer and the
pathophysiology but you knew that Hey
listen
a cancer cell
cannot use oxygen even if oxygen is
around it doesn't use oxygen to generate
energy it can only use glucose
and glutamine right if that's all you
knew
you told a child that I reckon a child
will say okay well let's not give the
body any more glucose or glutamine if
that's what cancer cell feeds on let's
stop it right now that may be overly
simplistic
but it kind of sounds like that's the
conclusion from what you're saying
yeah well I think the you can't stop the
glutamine because uh it's a
non-essential amino acid
and it's the most abundant amino acid in
our body it plays in a more a massively
important role in our gut our immune
system the urea cycle so glutamine is is
they call it a non-essential amino acid
but for cancer it's an absolutely
essential amino acid you can use diet
and lifestyle to lower blood sugar for
sure
but you need drugs uh that will
interrupt the glutamine pathway the
glutamanolysis pathway essentially so we
use a combat a combination of of diet
and uh repurposed drugs uh in the what
we developed called The Press pulse
therapeutic strategy for managing cancer
where we can we bring the body into a
state of very low glucose High ketones
and then we hit the surviving tumor
cells with uh drugs that Target that can
Target and disrupt the the glutamine
pathway but we do it over very we pulse
it we don't do it too aggressively
knowing knowing the value of glutamine
for the normal physiological function of
our body you can't go after glutamine uh
aggressively because you're going to
harm the body so you have to know the
biology you have to really understand
biology evolutionary biology to manage
cancer and once you understand that like
you said it's quite it's not that
complicated uh once you break down uh
the issues so so um once you understand
the issues and dissect them I mean yeah
there's you have to know about energy
metabolism and you have to know about a
variety of these things for sure but
once you know that then the the path to
resolution the path to long-term
management without toxicity becomes
obvious
you mentioned oxygen making energy in
the presence of oxygen or making energy
well in the presence of oxygen but
without utilizing oxygen
and I think a lot of the public have
heard about
aerobic exercise and anaerobic exercise
so they understand I think a lot of
people that will remember from biology
class at school that when your body's
utilizing oxygen you can do certain
forms of exercise but if you push up the
intensity and let's say you're playing
football or doing lots of high intensity
Sprints that at some point you go to
anaerobic where actually you're
generating energy
no longer using oxygen or not
exclusively using oxygen
for people who are thinking about that
can you help us understand like is is
there a similarity there between what
you're saying about cancer and the
difference between aerobic and anaerobic
exercise
yeah well I think that's a that's really
a an important point with the sprinting
you build up lactic acid because the uh
the muscles are working at such an
incredible speed uh that the amount of
oxygen delivered to the tissue in the
blood is not is not uh enough to keep
the muscles uh working through an
aerobic mechanism but the muscle can
generate tremendous energy using
anaerobic uh short periods of time for
short periods of time your muscles can
burn energy uh through anaerobic
mechanisms which is which is taking in a
massive amounts of glucose and getting
energy now as soon as the muscle stops
Contracting you're breathing oxygen so
that the the muscle can recover uh ATP
synthesis through oxidative uh
phosphorylation but when they were in
that sprinting condition uh they were
dumping out lactic acid which and this
was the how they found the Quarry cycle
Sol and Gertie story that received the
Nobel Prize when the muscles were
dumping out massive lactic acid into the
bloodstream from this very active
activity the lactic acid would go to the
liver and the liver would conjugate the
lactic acid back into a glucose two
lactic acids were reconfigured into
glucose molecule to replenish the the
blood sugars now muscle is very
interesting because it's it muscles
conserves IT muscle does not share
glucose with other organs this is a very
interesting thing information is not
enough to make change in your life you
have to take action so to help you take
action after watching this video I've
created a free nutrition guide for you
this contains the five most important
practices I've seen in over two decades
of seeing patients they work for you no
matter what your dietary preference
there's a step-by-step action plan to
help you implement those changes in your
life if you want to receive that free
guide right now just click on the link
in the description box below and it's an
evolutionary can serve that adaptation
so muscle stores energy in the form of
glycogen you have glycogen in your
muscles and that energy that can be
broken down very quickly for Rapid for
rapid rapid energy but muscle does not
share a glucose with any other organ for
from Mostly and that's because when a
lion would chase us we better damn well
have enough energy in our muscles to run
away
because if you're sharing if you're
sharing your energy with some other
organ you're not going to be able to run
as fast when the lion chases you so
um uh so clearly the conservation of
energy within muscles is an evolutionary
adaptation for survival liver on the
other hand will store glycogen and that
glycogen in the liver can be shared in
fact it's shared majority mostly with
the brain and uh as we stop eating blood
sugar goes down glycogen is mobilized
largely from from liver uh which can
then subserve the function of the brain
brain Burns a lot of a lot of glucose on
the other hand if the glycogen stores
that's why it takes about 36 hours after
you stop eating for the glycogen stores
and the liver to be depleted and then
all of a sudden we then mobilize energy
out of the adipocytes in our body and
the adipocytes release the fatty acids
back into the bloodstream those fatty
acids go to the liver and the liver
makes Ketone bodies water-solubles break
down products of the fat which can then
provide the brain the energy for the
brain so we are an unbelievably uh
sophisticated machine that we have these
different organs and different
populations of cells that can be
flexible and how they generate and use
energy the cancer cell on the other hand
is trapped it's linked only into a
fermentation energy so knowing that this
cell is massively Limited in its
capability of survive rival we now have
strategies we can take advantage of
knowing how the Body Works to eliminate
and kill cancer cells without toxicity
once you understand evolutionary biology
and systems physiology you now know the
strategies for managing cancer
through the lens of evolution
you mentioned before oxygen came into
the atmosphere and before we evolved
into being multicellular
those single cells would
generate energy through the process of
fermentation which is what cancer cells
do yeah so
is the cancer cell then moving towards a
more primitive form of energy production
yeah you're actually right I mean we
can't we can't say the cells before
oxygen came into the atmosphere as
cancer cells because cancer cells
develop from cells that were
differentiated they were they were a
part of the Society of cells however
they share a common uh energy mechanism
they ferment
um and fermentation before oxygen came
into the atmosphere was the way the way
all cells uh uh gut energy was a
fermentation mechanism and they would
ferment
um whatever carbohydrate or whatever
amino acid would be in the environment
and interestingly enough it was called
the alpha period of of life on Earth as
saint gergy called it all of the cells
at that time had dysregulated cell
growth they were unbridled proliferation
and they would proliferate like crazy
until the fermentation fuels in the
environment dissipated and then they
would die uh cancer cells are the same
they they will survive as long as there
are fermentable fuels in their micro
environment and when you remove the
fermentable fuels in their micro
environment they die very quickly just
like cells did in the old days the the
old days let's put it this way in in the
time before oxygen so but their behavior
is very very similar and and when you
say cancer cells look very primitive
like when you uh when you look at cancer
under a microscope I mean it's just a
massive pile of cells in all different
dysmorphic stages
um they look very primitive they look
they look uh very uh undifferentiated
compared to the normal cells of the
organ from which they arose but the
commonality is that the cancer cell is
surviving on fermentation
um because it's oxidative
phosphorylation is defective the cells
before oxygen came into the atmosphere
had no
mitochondria were a fusion between two
different organelles two different
organisms uh an organism that could
capture the oxygen and use it for energy
so we had this symbiotic and that led to
the formation of metazoans which are
multicellular organisms of which we are
all medicines multicellular couldn't
have multicellularity until you were
able to capture the energy from oxygen
in the in the fusion hybridization
between these organ between these
different organisms so the cancer cell
is simply using the heirlooms of energy
Metabolism from the past to grow in a
disregulated way and and that
dysregulated growth will continue as
long as the cancer cell has access to
fermentable Fuels in the micro
environment so our way of managing
cancer is simply to restrict the
availability of the fermentable fuels in
the micro environment using both diet
and specific drugs uh and then using the
normal cells of our body to out-compete
and digest and destroy the cancer cells
it's under believable when you really
understand the mechanisms and the
strategies involved you can get very
excited about it well it's absolutely
fascinating to hear it how we've evolved
how we get energy and then what happens
to that cancer cell and how it reverts
back to actually maybe the oldest form
the oldest way that we have the
generating energy the cancer cell is
utilizing that so that's that's really
really interesting I want to talk a
little bit about genes and genetics
because
we hear a lot of things like in the
media let's say over the last 10 years
there's been a growing awareness of
Brecken one and bracket 2 and how that
potentially can increase the risk of
things like breast cancer or ovarian
cancer by 50 to 80 depending on which
study you read now I'd love to know your
thoughts on that but I'd also love to
know
just more broadly about
this relationship between genes and
cancer I have heard prominent
oncologists in the UK professors say
things like we are born
with the genetic codes for cancer within
our cells but they're kept locked in
place by suppressor genes and then
something happens whether it be from you
know carcinogens in the diets or the
environments or whatever we're exposed
to and then what happens is that genetic
material becomes rearranged and once it
becomes rearranged those cells no longer
stop growing and they become cancerous
and they spread
so that's a Viewpoint I've heard what is
your view on that and I guess more
broadly where do genes fit into this
whole conversation around cancer
yeah uh well of course that's the basis
for the somatic mutation Theory here in
the United States National Cancer
Institute on their website they say
cancer is a genetic disease caused by
mutations in specific genes uh tumor
suppressor genes and proto-onco genes
and these kinds of things and this leads
to a dysregulated uh cell growth and
this is the dominant consistent view we
have right now the somatic mutation
Theory uh where uh the mutations arise
randomly in a population of cells which
then leads to uh disorder of the cell
cycle and and the proliferation but you
have two different kinds of genes you
have those inherited in the germline and
you have those that are acquired through
various insults in in the environment
when you mentioned about brachial one
the high the that's a inherited mutation
uh that contributes to a greater risk
for breast cancer
and when you look at what does the
bracha 1 mutation do it disrupts
oxidative phosphorylation in the
mitochondria the most the most uh
prominent inherited mutation is the p53
mutation in the leaf from many uh
disorder syndrome the leaf around many
were about 80 percent you have about 80
to 85 percent penetrance of that Gene
leading to ovarian cancer breast cancer
brain cancer is a variety of cancers
that are linked to the leaf from any
believe from many encodes a protein in
the electron transport chain of the
mitochondria cytochrome C oxidase II so
what you do what these inherited
mutations are doing we went through all
the inherited mutations and all of the
inherited mutations risk factors uh
damage mitochondria in a particular way
uh putting them on the path to
destabilized energy metabolism in a
consequent fermentation metabolism so so
the inherited mutations are we call
secondary risk factors not primary risk
actors because in order for an inherited
mutation to be a primary cause of a
disease like like uh the pre-senaline
mutation and Alzheimer's disease that's
a hundred percent associated with the
development of Alzheimer's disease there
is no cancer Gene linked uh a germline
linked mutation that is in what is 100
associated with the onset of a
particular cancer so we call those
secondary risk factors just like being
exposed to a carcinogen if you inherit a
mutation in bracha one or one of these
your your risk for the development of
cancer is certainly higher but it's not
100 100 percent now the in somatic
mutations this is where the cancer this
is where a cell in the body will
randomly accumulate mutations uh some of
which will then lead to destabilized
growth okay so where the somatic
mutations come from and they come from
destabilized energy metabolism in the
mitochondria how does that happened so
Ros reactive oxygen species are a
byproduct of dysfunctional oxidative
phosphorylation so the oxygen that the
tumor cell is taking in is not being
used efficiently for ATP synthesis but
rather is throwing out these radicals
these reactive oxygen species what do
they do they cause mutations in the DNA
they lead to the mutations in the DNA so
the mutations that we see in cancer are
largely Downstream epiphenomena of the
damage to oxidative phosphorylation
forcing the cell into a fermentation
metabolism leading to acidification of
the micro environment which further
damages the nuclear genome so that most
of what we see in cancer the genetic
mutations are largely Downstream
epiphenomena of the damage to oxidative
phosphorylation so they're not effects
they're not causes they're effects of
this whole process
okay so let's just get this really clear
so because a lot of people will have
absorbed the idea
that cancer is genetic and of course you
know that there's been a there's been a
conversation online for I would say at
least 10 years about what a woman might
want to do if they have one of these
brachi mutations and I think there's
some very prominent examples of women
having prophylactic operations removing
both breasts to try and ensure that they
don't
get breast cancer in the future and I
definitely want to get your perspective
on that and your view on on these kind
of procedures but the big picture I'm
getting from what you're saying is that
look these genes may increase the
likelihoods
that you are going to develop cancer but
they're not 100
they're not deterministic genes fully so
yeah yeah their risk we call them risk
fat it's a risk factor right it's a risk
factor but if you make uh
significant modifications to your diet
your lifestyle your environments the
amount of stress you're under or all
kinds of things that you try your best
to to significantly change your
environment
you can then also significantly decrease
your risk of developing that cancer even
if you have the gene
yes you are absolutely correct
so you have you have I guess at least
two choices if you are detected to have
uh the braco one let's just use that but
there are there are several other genes
that this would also apply to but the
brachial one you rest because you some
women
uh have done prophylactic removal of
breasts and ovaries and things like this
to reduce their risk for getting cancers
in those organ systems or
recognizing that they would have this
risk factor how would they reduce the
probability of that inherited mutation
causing cancer and you're absolutely
right Cancer Cannot occur if the
mitochondria in the cell remain healthy
and how do you keep mitochondria in your
cell healthy by exercise and enhancing
ketogenesis how do you do that well you
can do water only fasting you can do a
variety of of of
diets that will reduce glucose and
Elevate ketones ketones are a super fuel
for mitochondria they reduce reactive
oxygen species the damaging the damaging
byproducts of respiration so ketones can
significantly reduce damage to
mitochondria allowing that organelle to
function in a highly precise manner for
long periods of time so yes diet and
exercise in the right Foods in the right
context could take the risk of a hair
mutation that we would say 50 percent
chance of getting a a cancer with that
mutation you could reduce that down
massively I don't know to what extent
because the studies haven't been done in
the correct population but but we do
know that we can significantly just as
you said you can significantly reduce
your risk knowing that and you can't get
cancer without uh you get cancer from
damaged respiration protect the
mitochondria and the risk will go down
look I'm all for informed consent like
real informed consent so you tell a
patient
you know what all the options are and of
course a patient is entitled to do what
they want right then they're entitled to
do what they want with their own body
but what I'm passionate about why I work
so hard on this show each week is to
help give people information so actually
they're empowered to know well actually
there are some options here there are
some options now someone may say I don't
want to take that option
fine informed consent to me means or one
part of it is giving people all the
options so if you have been diagnosed
with epilepsy as well as the
anti-epileptic drugs if there's good
evidence as there clearly is that
ketogenic diets can be of use and in
some people can be transformative surely
you should also be told that at the same
time now you may go but I don't want to
do a ketogenic diet it's too difficult
it doesn't fit my life fine you're
entitled to make that decision but you
kind of need to be given that choice if
we're going to be evidence-based if
we're truly practicing informed consent
rights yeah absolutely I was on on those
decision committees when I was a member
of the epilepsy Society of America I was
the society's representative to the
corporations on this whole thing and you
know um the ketogenic diet developed
from
um Wilder in 1921 one only when he
realized that many of these intractable
seizures could be modified significantly
with water only fasting but water only
fasting is only good for a certain
period of time and you have to eat
something so uh what he found was that
when you water only fast blood sugar
goes down ketones go up is there a diet
that can do what water only fasting
could do and that was the the ketogenic
diet it was managing a lot of different
in children it works in adults but it's
the the children the problem is with
kids is that when they have a a blown
seizure or they have absent seizures or
whatever it disturbs the parents
tremendously and the parents have
control over the child's diet at what
they're doing so in order to avoid
seeing your child writhing on the floor
and foaming they would say okay you're
going to stay strict on this diet
because I don't want to see who sees in
the 1930s certain drugs became available
that would also stop seizures and
obviously it was much easier to take the
drug than to adhere to a kind of a rigid
buy it the problem with these drugs is
long term they have very adverse
consequences and then in the 1990s mid
1990s Jim Abrams uh of a movie producer
from Hollywood his son Charlie uh had
this terminal kind of epilepsy where he
was actually dying and then he contacted
Folks at the Johns Hopkins Medical
School in Baltimore
the late John Freeman who was one of the
few guys left that that liked to study
uh ketogenic diets and they rescued
Charlie uh from his condition they made
a movie out of it first Do no harm was
the movie by Merrell with Meryl Streep
uh a friend of Jim Abrams uh made this
movie which then brought tremendous
attention back to this ketogenic diet uh
uh because uh it had been it had fallen
by the wayside when I was at Yale
University in in New Haven Connecticut I
wanted to do a project on ketogenic diet
internal support and the people in the
neurology department in the medical
school in general said ah ketogenic
diets nobody's interested in that stuff
anymore so my grant was just like oh no
no more so when one of my students came
to me in the late 90s when I was here at
Boston College and said hey there's a
there's a meeting in wash in Seattle
Washington on ketogenic diet
spearheaded by Jim Abrams because his
son Charlie uh did so well in this
ketogenic diet he wanted to bring the
concept to the world that this ketogenic
diet should be resurrected as a
non-toxic management for epileptic
seizures so I told my seizure that
nobody's interested in ketogenic diets
so please send me anyway so I sent her
out there that means she came back oh my
God you can't believe how powerful the
diet is everybody's so excited about
this diet for epilepsy so we started
working on ketogenic diets because we
had the best animal models of epilepsy
just like humans with Epson seizures and
all this kind of stuff and we started to
see wow this this diet does work on the
animal models as well and I said we
published all these papers and
everything and um I said wow what's the
mechanism of action I know you got to
lower glucose and Elevate ketones well
we were doing research on cancer at the
same time looking at angiogenesis which
is the the vascularization of the tumor
cells so we put the the when we put the
epileptic mice on on calorie restricted
diets that lowered blood sugar elevated
ketones we knew from from Warburg
yesterday I said what the hell Warburg
he said you lower blood you're lower
blood sugar you can manage cancer so we
started to put uh move the diets that we
were using to manage epilepsy in the
mice onto our cancer models which are
the best model that we spontaneous
models of cancer in the mice and lo and
behold we said holy crap this these uh
calorie restricted diets knocked the
hell out of angiogenic when everybody's
getting excited about angiogenesis you
can you can completely manage
angiogenesis with these diets and you
know Napoleon Ferrar and all these other
guys that were making all these
anti-angiogetic immunotherapies and and
stuff and a lot of them don't work and
they cause the cancers to be worse but
when you when you start using metabolic
therapy so after we saw that and not
only that we started killing these
cancer cells through a variety of
different mechanisms okay uh and then we
said oh we should be shifting shifting
our power away from the we use we
actually had two uh parallel programs uh
metabolic management of epilepsy and
metabolic management of cancer but of
course uh folks from England and the
United States got together and they
wrote up a clinical trial they said well
we can't believe uh epilepsy managing
epileptic seizures with ketogenic diets
there's no clinical trials
um uh well Dr cross from England and uh
our group here at Johns Hopkins got
together and they wrote up a really nice
publication showing a clinical trial
that ketogenic diet absolutely can
manage a variety of epileptic seizures
in children so you'd say to yourself
well hey like you said well then we
should use this but no there will only
measure or they'll only do ketogenic
diet for managing seizures only after
your expensive drugs don't work then
you'll do that but we've all argued that
you should be doing metabolic therapy
for epilepsy first if the if that
doesn't work maybe you can consider
low-dose drugs no but they still they
still have it reversed in the cancer
field the stuff right now what I'm
saying is predominantly unknown people
have no clue that you can manage cancer
in a very similar kind of way obviously
with certain certain uh differences but
now that's the the situation so so the
argument is well we can't use metabolic
therapy for cancer because there's no
clinical trials to prove it does despite
the fact that the science is Rock Solid
to support why you should do that so
that's the conundrum that we have right
now is that no one on the planet has yet
and we can't do a clinical trial yet
because the people needed to do that
aren't trained and you need to know what
to do and how to do it and we're working
on that right now so as soon as we have
our treatment protocol we'll be able to
move into the cancer field with the same
with it with the same uh uh uh uh
intensity as we did in the epilepsy
field to manage to manage the epileptic
seizure so it's a it's an evolving
situation with parallel studies uh
knowing how the brain works on the
different the ketosis issue and all of
these different kinds of things coming
together to know how to enhance the
health and vitality of your normal cells
without harming the body I know I said
an awful lot in a very short period of
time no it's I mean you're clearly very
passionate about this and and with good
reason how long have you been studying
cancer for now
oh well I studied cancer for probably 40
years but it was not not in the way to
manage the disease uh I studied cancer
like 90 of the people studying cancer we
do research on some aspect of cancer
like I was doing glycolipids we were
looking at you know all the different
abnormalities and glycolipids and cancer
cells so it had nothing to do uh with
actual uh design to manage the disease
of course everybody in their papers
everybody many many people put it oh
this information could potentially be
important at some future point or
whatever
um but it wasn't a direct it wasn't a
direct assault uh on the management of
the disease uh where you could actually
cons where you can actually see even
observable outcome in someone that would
be riddled with a stage four cancer uh
okay how would understanding the
glycolipid dysregulation and that's and
that person with the stage 4 for cancer
in a very short period time lead to a
management strategy and the answer was
none so and that's the majority of
people signaling Cascades and looking at
this and looking at that I mean you can
do that for the next 150 200 years and
you're not going to have any impact in
the clinic so the idea is how are you
going to imp how are you going to make
your research impactful to the person
dealing with the stage four cancer today
we've used the word cancer a lot during
this conversation so far and of course
there are lots of different types of
cancer you know you can differentiate
them depending on location in the body
brain pancreas prostate uh of course the
different pathological types of cancers
as well so when we say cancer do we need
to be a bit more specific about what
we're talking about or would you state
based upon your research that actually
all of them are fundamentally the same
there is a problem with respiration
there's a problem with generating energy
in the mitochondria like just help us
understand that if you will yeah well
that's really so important because we
were all led to believe and we still are
pounded by information saying you're we
have a therapy for your specific kind of
cancer you hear this all the time like
breast cancer is different from colon
cancer different from brain cancer
different from bladder cancer different
from the leukemias you hear you hear
this all the time and and that's based
again on the somatic mutation theory of
cancer when you start to look at the
mutations in all these different cancers
they're all quite different from each
other they're different from each other
within the same within the same type of
cancer within the same tumor you'll find
all kinds of different mutations but all
of the cells now what I what I did
I I went back and I said well if
um if all all the cancers that we know
are fermenting uh to get energy that
says there's some commonality between
them so in order to in order to justify
that I had to go back and go through
historical records on ultra um um uh
histology my the the the
um you know the way electron microscopy
Ultra structure of the cells in a cancer
so I would look at lung cancer breast
cancer colon cancer pancreatic cancer
bladder cancer blood cancers and I was
looking for a commonality and that
commonality uh was abnormalities in the
number structure and function of
mitochondria in all the major Cancers
and and that's what I found and in the
in the concepts of evolutionary biology
structure determines function this is a
a a a a well-established concept
structure determines function if the
structure of the organelle that
generates energy through oxygen is
abnormal the function of that organelle
will be diminished in some significant
way leading to an alternative energy
which would be fermentation so when I
went back and looked at all of the major
cancers I found abnormalities in all of
these different Cancers and then that
would lead to the explanation that they
would all need to have fermentation in
one way or another and that leads to the
the concept that if they do ferment
there's only two fuels that they can
ferment which is glucose and glutamine
and we know every major cancer is
dependent on glucose and glutamine
fermentation so it comes right back to
the yes they look different under the
microscope they look different in their
genomic profiles but metabolically
they're all very very similar and will
respond quite effectively to a singular
strategy of metabolic therapy
the ketogenic diets or certainly the
presence of ketones in the body is now
you know the research is accelerating so
fast we're seeing
benefits potential benefits of ketones
in neurodegenerative disease in
Alzheimer's in mental illness
in cancer of course in weight loss and
it's really interesting isn't it that
how can this one fuel source or
potentially this one diet ketosis
and of course there's many ways to get
into nutritional ketosis
but it's it's very interesting to me how
this could potentially have
a wide variety of different benefits for
a wide variety of seemingly different
conditions now
let's look at this methodically so yeah
you're right you're absolutely right I
mean okay let's go back to our um
Paleolithic ancestors all right so uh
our uh for uh thousands and thousands of
years
um we were in a state of ketosis uh
mainly because food was not available
carbohydrates were certainly very
limited to seasonal uh situations so our
ancestors we were always in a state of
therapeutic ketosis we we know that in
the Aboriginal populations Not only was
cancer rare diabetes was rare uh
cardiovascular disease was rare
Alzheimer's was never heard of or rarely
discussed or rarely identified
um uh as some all of these things that
we see
now you've just uh mentioned or are
linked to mitochondrial uh function
so uh ketones as I said as as my late
good friend
um uh Richard Veach from the national uh
uh NIH ketones are a super fuel uh they
allow the health and vitality of our
mitochondria they allow our mitochondria
to remain very very healthy so when you
when you talk about
um you know all of these different
linkages for all these different
diseases they all comes back to energy
metabolism and we didn't have uh uh all
of these chronic diseases when we were
existing in the Paleolithic period we
had other things that would kill us like
uh infections bacterial in fact we
didn't have antibiotics uh a Falls uh
arthritis you would have a variety of
things that would limit your capability
of longer term survival but cancer
dementia cardiovascular disease all of
these kinds of things uh we're not there
yeah so or very very rare so you're when
you say ketogenic diet it's actually you
got to be very careful because it's not
necessarily a ketogenic diet it's the
state of being in therapeutic ketosis is
is at a ketogenic diet can put you in
therapeutic ketosis but many of these
so-called ketogenic diets are not done
correctly people go out eat too much of
it they don't do it the right way it's
nutritionally imbalanced I mean but uh
but the bottom line the the underlying
theme Here is nutritional ketosis
prevents chronic diseases
that's a really interesting point there
right so if we're going to talk about as
I hope we get to during this
conversation nutrition and cancer and
the link between it and you've covered
bits of it throughout this conversation
so far
a lot of people will talk about so this
there's there's lots of n equals one
studies there's lots of anecdotes of
people
uh saying that I got a cancer diagnosis
and it caused me to stop and look at
everything in my life and I changed
dramatically My Lifestyle I started to
meditate I loaded stress I stopped
traveling all the time for work I went
on a keto diet for example and you know
my cancer never came back right or
whatever it might be you hear that a lot
with uh a ketogenic diet and of course
that can be practiced in many different
ways but you also hear people saying
that
if they radically change their diet to
plant-based diets right there's many
case studies out there that I've heard
or certainly people reporting now
it's really interesting to me so I'm
trying to put it all together and go
well okay
what
Thomas just said was that it's not
necessarily A ketogenic diet it's the
state of ketosis so I guess what I'm
trying to get to a plant-rich diet
will have lots of polyphenols right
within it and I know there's been quite
a few studies showing the benefits of
polyphenols in terms of their role the
signaling molecules and what they can do
for cancer risk
given what you know about cancer how do
you put these two things together where
some people say they revolutionize their
health with a keto diet other people
will say that they've done it with a
plant-based diet how does that sit with
you when you think about cancer just
taking a quick break to give a shout out
to Vivo barefoot shoes now I've been a
huge fan of Vivo barefoots for over 10
years now well before they started
supporting my podcast they are the only
shoes that I wear then they really have
had a huge impact on my own life and the
lives of many of my patients you see
when people start wearing Minimalist
Shoes like vivos you can see
improvements in things like back pain
hip pain knee pain foot pain even things
like plantar fasciitis can often get
better and scientific research shows us
that just wearing vivos for about four
months or so improves the strength in
your feet by over 60 percent which is
absolutely incredible one thing people
don't realize about these shoes is just
how flexible they are which allows your
feet to do what your feet naturally want
to do rather than the shoe dictating
your foot's movements Vivo Barefoot are
giving my audience a 15 off one-time
code when you make your first order and
they make it really easy for you to give
them a try they give a 100 day trial for
new customers so if you don't like them
you just send them back for a full
refund I'm a huge fan I really hope you
take advantage of this offer to get your
15 off codes all you need to do is go to
vivobeath.com forward slash live more or
click on the link in the description box
below
yeah well I think those are important
points and you know we don't have
answers uh to all of that yet I I know
Kelly Turner wrote a book on called
radical remission and um uh in her book
on these cancers that you've just
mentioned like some people just do
something different and cancer goes away
she she kind of cataloged all the
different kinds of things that were
linked to rat so-called radical
remissions and and a large amount of it
had to do with a dramatic change in diet
and lifestyle uh whether whether you
were a carnivore going through a vegan
or a vegan going through a carnivore it
seemed it seemed as though there were
Radical changes in diet and lifestyle
that were um uh linked to these uh these
remissions uh you have to you have to
realize
um the cancer the cancer cell is a cell
uh hovering near death all the time
because it can't get energy efficiently
so it has to depend upon the
fermentation fuels in the micro
environment and ever whenever you change
the whole physiology of your body you
are creating all the we evolved as a
species to survive under incredible uh
stresses in our environment whether it's
cold hot food absence food abundance or
whatever it was uh Rick Potts of the
Smithsonian institution described it uh
as our flexibility in uh survival cancer
cells can't do that they they're very
limited so when you have these radical
changes in your body going from one
state to another sometimes this just the
tumor cells just simply cannot handle
the change in some people making these
radical changes so you don't have a a
very uh a good clinical trial or a
sophisticated educated approach to say
you know what is responsible for the
elimination of your cancer by by this
radical change all we know is the tumor
cells up and died and they disappeared
and you're now healthy
um in the movie that's coming out the
documentary film called cancer
Revolution
um by Brad and Maggie Jones Brad is a
professional documentary filmmaker and
his wife Maggie who contacted me she had
a stage four breast cancer that
metastasized to her brain uh she went on
one of these radical keto changes and
she her cancer disappeared and she's
still doing very very well but they've
collected a lot of these n of ones a lot
of these people that you just mentioned
and put them in the movie
um and they're all the faces are there
and I must have I promise Divine one
after another after another and she's
collecting more and more of these
individuals that had stage four cancers
of a broad range lung cancer brain
cancer colon cancer breast cancer and
they're all alive yeah now what is it
what is it about this and there's no
there's no comprehensive clinical trials
on this because how would you design
such a clinical trial to look at some
sort of a radical change in your diet
lifestyle
um there's a lot of variables that have
not yet been pinned down that we should
need to focus on and this this is the
whole thing with using ketogenic diets
for managing cancer what kind of
ketogenic diet that's why we developed
the glucose Ketone index calculator we
published this and what it does is
allows any patient healthy or sick to
know whether they're going to be in a
state of maximal metabolic homeostasis
and it's a meter you can buy it on
Amazon the keto Mojo meter and it's a
you take a a blood a drop of blood and
you can measure with one stick your
blood sugar in with another stick your
blood ketones and if you can get the
ratio down to 2.0 or below you are going
to be in a state of metabolic
homeostasis and that that really puts
tremendous pressure on cancer cells
diabetes all of these Variety in other
words you're bringing yourself back to a
state of metabolicomius with a
quantitative measure to let you know
when you're there okay I want to talk
about that I just want to finish off
um from the previous question about keto
diets plant-based diet diets another way
I was thinking about it as you were
talking is that if we
if we develop cancer
based upon everything we've said so far
I think it's fair to say that there's
something going on you have been
receiving
a variety of inputs
whether out of choice or not out of
choice whether you're aware of or
whether you're not aware of but
whatever's happened your current
environment has resulted
in you developing cancer right we don't
know maybe what exactly it was but it
was multiple signals from your
environment and lifestyle so if you then
undergo radical environmental and
lifestyle change
I'm not saying no matter what but you
know if you're significantly making
changes so the environment in which the
human body is now existing
is fundamentally different well it kind
of stands to reason that in some cases
depending on how advanced that cancer is
depending on the type it stands to
reason that yeah in some people the
environment has shifted and you're no
longer getting the inputs so cancer
cells are no longer sort of growing and
proliferating right does it does that
sound like a reasonably correct you're
absolutely correct yeah so especially if
you catch it like early yeah well when
you're many people not all people many
people are first diagnosed with cancer
they never knew the goal gee I just
diagnosed with cancer how do you feel I
feel great uh it's at that stage uh
where the body is pretty healthy other
than you have a growing tumor somewhere
where you can do this radical change and
blast out these uh marginalized and
blast out these cancer cells the problem
the problem is many cancer many folks
develop who are diagnosed with cancer
immediately without any alternative
thinking or recognize they go in for
toxic poisons and radiation and and and
what happens is that undermines the
health Vitality of the rest of the cells
in the body making them less capable of
challenging the Vitality of these of the
the existence of these tumor cells so
then well I get so many people
contacting me who have failed every kind
of a cancer treatment and the cancer is
still growing and now they want to do
one of these metabolic therapies and
their bodies are raked uh you know
they're they're emaciated they they have
all kinds of adverse effects and all
kinds of stuff and now you're going to
ask your body to go through this uh
tough uh radical change uh to try to
eliminate they should have been doing
that at the very beginning not to say it
can't happen uh because when you have
sometimes you get a stage four diagnosis
you're still in pretty good health oh I
got stage four diagnosis okay well great
now you do metabolic therapy to pound
out those cancer cells not to say that
we can't use radiation and chemo uh but
they would be used in a very strategic
way in very low doses at the right time
at the at the right setting but not uh
massive poisoning at the beginning of
this disease
that is such a key point because I
really think that that message has to
come through loud and clear which you'll
not necessarily saying that we shouldn't
be using some of these modern advances
like chemotherapy or radiotherapy what I
think you're saying is you've just
pointed out there is essentially that
look let's get involved with the
metabolic side of things right at the
start you know and I'm guessing you're
going to say that in some people that
may be sufficient in others it's going
to reduce the size it's going to allow
some cancer cells to die off so you can
be a bit more targeted and use lower
doses of chemotherapy or radiotherapy
rights absolutely absolutely we have
seen that ourselves you know uh you
shrink the tumor down and make it
extremely vulnerable now you can come in
with say uh one of these therapies
um modern more modern therapies at a
lower dose in a more strategic way to
finish off the cancer survivors that the
metabolic therapy wasn't able to kill
because one thing is going to be in
common when you Pare down the cancer
cells are all kinds of as you said
they're all genetically different from
each other they're all fermenting but
each other but when you pair them down
the survivors of metabolic therapy will
have something in common and and that
that common commonality uh makes them
extremely vulnerable now to some sort of
targeted therapy because all your all
the cells are going to have the same
Target uh so that's the stress so in
other words we need we have a lot of
tools for managing cancer it's just that
we haven't been using them in the
correct way or understanding the
concepts of evolutionary biology to
enhance that success of the of the
treatments that we already have yeah we
kind of need to embrace this approach
more not going either or it's like well
why can't you do both why can't why
can't we do it but but we're not but
going back to what I said at the start
that I was in I started medical school
in 1995 right we were taught how to
diagnose and we were taught to treat
with Pharmaceuticals yeah end off right
that is literally what we were taught
and again that can be very useful for
certain conditions but there's a big
piece missing there right so the
training needs to evolve and I I
honestly don't feel that has evolved
even now you know almost 30 years on
well you're you're 100 correct and and
uh what we know we base it on on the
science I mean I I do the experiments
here in the lab I I I have the best
animal models for cancer so we know what
it's doses timing and scheduling this is
not what we call sexy science this is
just knowing how to how to manipulate
the tools that you have to the maximum
efficiency and then we can translate
that directly to patients in the clinic
when I have all these my physician
colleagues they they're coming to me and
they're saying wow you can't believe how
powerful this stuff is uh when you do it
the right way our group in Istanbul
Turkey are using uh metabolic therapy
with conventional uh uh treatments and
they're using far lower Doses and and
the outcomes are so much better so this
is an evolving uh process right now but
I agree 100 we have to do we have to
know the tools that we have what will
work the best and how to how to blend
the system
um but that we're not doing that yeah uh
we're not doing that at all I have all
this information I publish all these
papers we do all this kind of stuff and
then when the cancer patient goes to
their oncologist now there's no evidence
to support that if it were really true I
would have learned it in medical school
well we'll get into that because I've
got a few things to share about that
let's go to that glucose Ketone meter
that you mentioned that sounded really
interesting right so
you're measuring the ratio between
glucose in your Bloods and ketones is
that right yes now if you were to take
you live in I think Boston if you were
to go out into the center of Boston
and pick the first 10 people who passed
you on an average streets downtown on a
Saturday afternoon right what do you
think the glucose Ketone ratios would be
in that population typically I know
exactly what they would be because we
we've done these okay okay not to guys
walking through the streets but to the
students tonight they're at the
University here so we can where all of
us we test uh it's about 50 to 60
sometimes 70. hold on so 50 is that to
one so it's basically yeah so so it's
um you would have glucose levels
um well you can do normally uh your
glucose levels would be uh let's say 100
milligrams per decaliter what does that
come out to be you have to divide that
by 18 and that gives you the millimolar
uh ratio was at 4.5 or something like
this
um you know four point and the Ketone
value in millimolar would be
0.1 so you divide the uh 4.5 by 0.1 or
one of these kinds of things okay uh you
you come up with a value about 50 I I
have all the the numbers about 40 to 50
times higher based upon yeah yeah yeah
okay so then you stop eating like for
how like when we did the water only
fasting here with the students
um it takes about four days and then you
start to see the ketones rise and the
glucose drops so uh because you stop
eating once you stop eating you're not
bringing glucose back into your system
the only way you're going to get glucose
now is through the process of
gluconeogenesis where your body will
make glucose from breaking down uh
proteins and also you mobilize the fats
and most of these are called
triglycerides so the two glycerol
backbones could be conjugated to make
one glucose molecule but the majority of
the fats are going to be used to make
Ketone bodies so the ketones are going
to gradually increase in your
bloodstream and their glucose gradually
goes down and you come to a ratio where
the ketones and the glucose are about
the same similar millimolar or in your
blood or the ketones are higher in
millimolar than the glucose therefore
you get numbers below one and that
becomes super healthy so you did you say
before you want to get to two or below
for killing cancer for killing cancer
cells for sure
um but for just General Health yeah you
can get down to five or even like my
good friend Dom D'Agostino from
University of South Florida he's always
in ketosis right he's always in this
kind of estate uh he's like one of these
Paleolithic guys you know he likes to
eat the alligators and squirrels I mean
it was one of these kinds of guys he's
always like living he's like living the
Paleo I really like Dom's work and I I'm
I hope they're going to try and get him
on the show later in the year and and he
sheds well we'll get this maybe later
but he did share one of his colleagues I
think in a was it a mouse model where
they had GBM glioblastoma yeah it was
your model yeah and actually
um by using ketosis yeah and
radiotherapy there was like full
remission I think from record which is
uh it's hyperbaric oxygen hyperbaric
oxygen we use hyperbaric oxygen as an
alternative to radiation because uh both
radiation and hyperbaric oxygen kill
cancer cells by increasing reactive
oxygen species so Ros so if I can kill
but the hyperbaric oxygen doesn't work
until it doesn't work well until you
bring your blood sugar down and your
ketones up so once you put the pressure
on the cancer cells then you put
patients in hyperbaric chambers once
they're in a state of ketosis and then
you start killing cancer cells by the
same mechanism that radiation does but
without harming the rest of the body
that's why it's beautiful yeah
so so that's the glucose Keystone Mesa
for a second right so the average person
on the street who's maybe not paying
attention to their diets may have a 50
to 1 ratio
right yeah you're saying that if you
have cancer and you want to kill cancer
cells you want to get down to at least
two to one ideally lower right yeah 2.0
or below 2.0 or below so that's a huge
change now yeah I don't know if you know
this or not but someone let's say like
many people these days to try and put
their type 2 diabetes into remission are
following low carb diets uh on it and I
guess you know low carb can mean so many
different things but to many people it's
when they keep their carbohydrate intake
under 50 grams of carbs per day some
people would use that as their
definition but of course I'm aware
there's a huge variety there if someone
was having
around 50 grams of carbs a day and on a
low carb diet what might you imagine
their glucose to Ketone ratio to be well
it's certainly going to be lower than
what than it was before you could use
this meter this we published the
calculation and the the company that
makes keto Mojo put a chip in the meter
so you just push the button it gives you
the ratio right off the bat so patients
can can always monitor
uh their gki we call it glucose Ketone
index their GK do you do it yourself
oh yeah I do it occasionally I I'll I'll
uh some guy will tell me oh I got this
keto drink so I'll I'll not eat for
about 18 to 20 hours I'll take my my gki
find out what it is stop eating free and
then chug his little little drink do
some exercise come back and measure it
again and determine whether or not I'm
in going in the right direction and
sometimes it does it does work and do
you have a feeling because I guess
we can talk about treatment and we could
talk about prevention right so if you
have cancer already we know that there's
been a variety of signals to your body
and for whatever reason now cancer cells
are starting to proliferate so at that
point you're saying no matter
I think you're saying no matter what the
cancer is or the site of it one of the
things you want to be thinking about is
trying to reduce these fermentable fuel
sources to the cancer which are glucose
and glutamine and it's easier with diet
at least to try and remove that glucose
by going into ketosis so far so good
yeah you're absolutely right and and
what what uh George Cahill who was the
head of the Johnson diabetes center
passed away a few years ago he found
that the patients who did water only
fasting to 14 to 20 days the blood
glutamine would go down as well so so if
you want to push it that way and I have
I know personally several people who
have completely eliminated their cancer
by just doing water only fasting yeah uh
now people when you tell cancer patients
oh you got to do you don't don't eat any
food for 21 days or so they'll think
you're nuts so that's why the the keto
like a carnivore only diets uh very low
in carbohydrates vegan diets are a
little bit harder because the plants we
have but we have to use a lot of energy
to to burn the plants up we didn't
evolve to eat we were not born born we
did not involve to eat only plants we
evolved we're omnivores we can eat
everything but you're right so the gki
values will tell whatever person whether
you're a vegan a carnivore or whatever
it it cuts across all diets it cuts
across everything because it tells you
right off the bat whether I'm in a Zone
to kill cancer cells regardless what
they always ask me can I eat this can I
eat that I don't know I said what does
it do to your gki yeah this is
interesting right because we've all got
different
bodies we've got different microbiomes
right we all we're seeing that with
personalized nutrition now that someone
can have a banana and their blood sugar
can go into their diabetic range someone
else could have a banana and have a
pretty stable blood sugar right so right
I love things that cut through
the nutrition was because ultimately
it's like well what's going to work for
you do we know yet
and I I think I'm gonna buy one of these
glucose Keystone meters straight after
this conversation I just want I'd love
to know what I'm in yeah in fact I I
made the meter for glioblastoma patients
with brain cancer because they they
needed more than anyone but now I get
all these Health gurus out there these
guys that are running health clinics and
everything and they're saying oh I got a
gki like you know it's like so uh
obviously it's cutting across the the
populations what do you want your gki at
you know we're
it's hard to say all I know is that uh
when you don't feel well and you feel
kind of
iffy don't eat for don't eat for a
couple of bad whatever was bothering you
seems to go away on your body when
you're having you start getting super
healthy
um but if I were to have cancer having
written the protocol to treat cancer
prices with my colleague Thomas durye
and we're working on the treatment
protocols right now you know the first
thing you're going to do is you're going
to you're going to you take stop taking
carb I'll get your GK High down and
people say oh I don't care how hard it
is that you'll get it closer to a 2.0 or
below below one you're going to start
killing cancer cells so what we do
because it's such a hard thing what we
do is we we we take zero carb diets for
about 10 days to see where your gkis and
you can start to see it stair step down
in the right direction and then from
there you can step off into water only
fasting because the trauma of doing
water only fasting the difficulty of
your physiology to do that like as as
opposed to going cold turkey okay you're
going to eat a big meal today and now
for the next five days you're not going
to eat anything the body goes through
it's almost like trying to break a a a
alcohol nicotine addiction yeah the body
the brain is addicted to glucose it's a
it's like a it's like a an addictive
agent so you have to lower that
addiction slowly with a zero carb diet
you're still eating but you're not
getting carbs and then once you're down
to a gki of about five or seven you jump
now into water only fasting once you're
in that zone of water only fasting now
and you can keep a low gki that's when
we come in with the battery of drugs
these uh um these repurposed drugs that
hammer a hammer the glutamine and
further lower the glucose these tumor
cells are toast they can't handle this
kind of a dramatic change in your body
they up and die and not only that the
the body cells compete directly with the
tumor cells starving with even further
and not only that it's called autolytic
cannibalism your body actually goes
after the tumor cells and uses them for
the fuel for the rest of the cells that
are healthy it's unbelievable you have
to this is evolutionary biology in
action it is absolutely amazing to hear
this it's even more amazing to see it in
action
some people uh Thomas are gonna say this
is pretty controversial right you're
you're talking about
stuff that we've got no evidence for
right you're talking about water really
fast no no I I know you have I'm just
trying to
I'm trying to think about what would
your critics say now some people will
say you need
um people are going to lose weight right
and you need proper weight to fight off
this cancer and to deal with the toxic
effects of the chemo right so for anyone
who is thinking that and I'm sure this
has been leveled at you before what
would you say to them
well this is again uh an extremely
important important Point
um
uh you know when you say weight loss why
why there's two reasons why you would
lose weight with a cancer what is the
cachexia which is the signaling from the
cancer cells to the muscles to dissolve
the muscle to get glutamine for the
cancer so um and the other reason for
weight because the treatment you're
going to be giving this poor person is
so poisonous they have a fatigue
diarrhea nausea vomiting all this kind
of stuff this is this is makes you lose
weight you're not hungry anymore you're
you're so we want you to take as much
carbohydrate back into your body to keep
the weight on so cachexic weight loss
and poisonous weight loss from poison
um this is called pathological weight
loss you're you're sick
as opposed to therapeutic weight loss
when you stop eating your body gets
super healthy it doesn't you're not
poisoning the body you're making it
stronger and healthier so that's why
depending on the weight of the patient
at the time we start the or my
colleagues will start the treatment we
have to design the kind of treatment
that would be appropriate for that
individual's body weight if you have a
some guy walking into the into the the
clinic that weighs 300 pounds and you're
worried about him uh losing weight from
the treatment I mean this is absurd this
kind of this guy with that amount of
body weight can blast the hell out of
his cancer so just because he has so
much energy stored in his body that
tumor cells won't be able to use the
fats that he mobilizes so you have to
use it you have to understand the
difference between therapeutic weight
loss versus pathological weight loss and
the medical establishment hasn't come to
recognize these differences yet so they
don't they think weight loss is bad uh
yeah because you're poisoning somebody
you know oh um that you're gonna you're
gonna lose weight because you're poison
you don't have to poison the the thing
of it is is that once you do metabolic
therapy the amount of drugs that you
would need to kill off the tumor cells
now become so much less so you really
you're really dealing with an altogether
different physiological state but
getting back to your really important
point is when the cancer patient goes
into the clinic they should be at least
told that there are alternative options
to the treatment plan that we have been
indoctrinated to use so I think and
that's where we have this problem there
is uh one size fits all you you're
either you either do it my way or the
highway and so many cancer patients
email me and say I asked my oncologist
if he could help me do metabolic therapy
and he says there's no evidence to
support that and I say well you got to
read the scientific literature and you
have to understand the science and then
you'll know that it works and what's
more important you're 100 correct many
can cancer patients would love to be
participants in their health care they
want to know that they're that their
actions are also helping them survive
and the traditional Cancer Treatments we
have today takes that completely out of
their hands they just sit there get
radiation chemo and whatever they're
going to give this patient with the
patient absolutely doing nothing
yeah I mean there's so much to unpack
there I'm loving my conversation with
you I think this is so important we get
this message out but one of the
frustrations will be I'm sure for some
of the listeners or viewers on the back
of this as they'll hear this information
and maybe
they have cancer or a family member has
and they may go to their oncologist and
have this conversation and
chances are
this will be shut down and it will be
like look I don't know about that stuff
I mean
four years ago
a really close friend of mine his son I
think at the age of maybe six or seven
was diagnosed with an optical pathway
glioma
and of course very scary to you know for
your child to have this tumor inside
your brain
and you know initially they started I
think down the conventional routes I
think initially
um he had a course of chemotherapy
but as my friends started to read up and
you know he went all in spent hours a
day researching the papers experts like
yourself listening and he thought wait a
minute
I'm not sure about this I'm not sure I
like what's been offered versus what I
think we can do he has basically for
four years there has been no increase in
size at all and he's done it all and to
be fair I feel that he's done it all a
huge amount of stress he's taken on to
you know seven days a week obsessively
research the literature trying to get
help it's not getting help from his
oncologist you know he told me recently
he said one of the first things his
oncologist said to him was oh you're
gonna do the the no sugar thing don't
worry in four weeks you'll be back
eating McDonald's they all are that's
the first thing which is a pretty
um
I just don't know why or how a doctor
would say that what what even if that's
what the doctor believes I'm not
convinced that that has any benefit at
all uh to saying that uh to a parent of
a child with a tumor I mean what would
you say to that well it speaks to a
profound lack of knowledge on the part
of the oncology community and it's not
just where you are I see it all the time
here in the states as well
um at the Mayo Clinic uh which is
supposed to be you know a top-notch
medical center and for certain uh
aspects of medicine they they are but
when it comes to cancer
um they they're clueless uh one of one
of the people who emailed me said they
went to the Mayo Clinic with
glioblastoma and one of the neuro
oncologists there said sugar has nothing
to do with glioblastoma
and I said that we were the first to
publish a direct association between
glioblastoma and the mouse and how fast
the tumor uh how that the sugar and how
fast sugar could make a tumor grow and
then that was replicated in humans with
glioblastoma hyperglycemia is an
accelerant to Rapid tumor growth and
it's been repeated dozens of times and
now it's been shown for almost every
major cancer that the higher the blood
sugar the faster the tumor grows the
lower the blood sugar the slower this
has been now repeated and yet for a
person treating patients to say that
sugar has nothing to do with
glioblastoma speaks to a profound lack
of knowledge on the part of not only
that person but the entire establishment
another person you might want to talk to
is Pablo Kelly from Devon England
um Pablo uh chose no radiation chemo or
steroids to manage his glioblastoma he's
still alive eight eight almost nine
years August will be nine I'm just I'm
just and just explained to people how
bad the prognosis is when you have a
diagnosis or when you have glioblastoma
it's a brain tumor it killed John McCain
of our country Ted Kennedy it killed the
President Biden's son Beau Biden I did
the studies for for many many decades on
glioblastoma the issue is why is
survival for glioblastoma so poor
there's been not a single major advance
in a hundred years and I keep pointing
this out in 1925 survival was 8 to 14
months in 2023 survival is 8 to 17
months so I mean you're talking about no
progress in a hundred years and what we
have found what I have found in my
research is not only is the tumor very
bad it grows it grows rapidly
um radiation uh treatment frees up
massive amounts of glucose and glutamine
in the micro environment when you
irradiate somebody's brain tumor the
head swells uh the radiation forces
blood sugar into the into the
stratosphere and not only that they give
you high dose steroids to reduce the
inflammation from the radiation which
raises blood sugar even higher so you're
you're actually contributing a micro
environment rich in the two fermentable
fuels that drive the rapid growth of the
cancer I have published this over and
over again and I said as long as you
continue to continue to irradiate the
person's brain you're never going to
achieve a level of success that you
would expect now Pablo Kelly rejected
radiation he rejected temazol he
rejected it all and went from metabolic
therapy alone people say oh he's only an
N of one yeah and N of one he could be
that he could be the the rule rather
than the exception but to stop the
radiation of the brain by by Uncle by
radiation oncologists is an absolute
essential a part for encrypt to if you
want to keep people alive longer you
have to stop irradiating their tumors
and we have a treatment protocol that
will that will hopefully do this but I
tell you when you're when you're
indoctrinated and wrapped into a into
this constant system it's very hard to
break the habits of what you're doing
yeah I think that's the problem you know
I I genuinely believe that all doctors
nurses Healthcare professionals
are doing the best for their patients
based upon what they've been taught
based on what they know based upon the
current Paradigm it and I know you've
been shouting from the routers trying to
shake up this Paradigm and go you know
the other the other thing to really
think about here is that
and I always say this when we're talking
about nutrition changes is that look
like there's there's very little
downside here right improving your diet
whatever that means depending on what
you're doing whether it's cancer or
anything else there's no downside here
right rarely you know well you know
that's that's an interesting point
you'll hear some of the people in the
oncology center said oh that ketogenic
diet is very dangerous you're going to
get cardiovascular disease or something
like this and and I I said what you got
a brain tumor you got a glial blastoma
you're worried and and the the issue is
relative you're exactly right downside
do you think a a metabolic therapy has
more downside than toxic radiation and
poisonous chemicals yeah I mean give me
a break and also what you were saying
Thomas before is that you could do them
both you could use the metabolic therapy
to reduce the cancer size improve the
health of other cells and then use small
targeted doses which have less side
effects so it's not either or so public
Kelly you're saying what's has been a
life of what eight nine years is that
right yes yeah yeah and he he was given
nine months a nine months to live wow
and and he said no it's all over the
English newspapers there was many why
did you say he was Devin Devin Devin I
might try and get hold of him oh god oh
he's a he's a character he he can tell
you what he did oh yeah now since got
married he has two children uh he would
have never had any of this so uh um if
he had followed uh standard standard of
care would have killed him uh a long
time ago so he was bold he was bold
though he he really fought against uh
using the standard of care despite all
the the dire prognosis that he was given
Thomas one thing I I really want to make
sure we make clear right
you'd have mentioned how hyperglycemia
so elevated blood sugar levels is an
accelerant for tumor growth right and
that fits with everything we've been
talking about so far metabolic
dysfunction a problem in the
mitochondria
you know what happens when a cancer cell
is there it no longer uh is using oxygen
appropriately it's getting its fuel from
fermentable sources which is glucose and
glutamine yeah
so it makes sense when you have a
diagnosis of cancer you may want to
reduce sugar reduce glucose maybe go
into ketosis but if we shift our lens to
prevention
right of course there are many things
that can cause cancer you know we've
already mentioned that diet lack of
exercise
um environmental pollutants carcinogens
whatever it might be
can we say
that sugar is causing cancer because I
think that's that's why we really need
to be very careful with our messaging
right what what's there's something to
do with our diet as a therapeutic
intervention if we have been diagnosed
but what if you are I don't know in your
30s and 40s and and pretty well and you
listen to my podcast you try and stay
healthy try and make small changes you
know
what's the relationship there between
sugar and cancer well I I think we can
never call Sugar a carcinogen we cannot
we cannot yeah no sugar is not a
carcinogen okay but sugar uh creates a
systemic inflammation in the body over
time uh C-reactive protein goes up now
how do we know this obesity the Obesity
epidemic which is now becoming worldwide
in in industrialized societies the
Obesity epidemic is the result of of the
storage you get fat by storing carbo
hydrates you don't get fat by eating
carbs that's why you lose weight with a
ketogenic diet you can't you can't store
fat you store carbs as fat you don't
store fat as fat people this is another
tremendous Mis uh conception
misunderstanding so we have an obesity
epidemic obesity has now replaced
smoking as a major risk factor for
cancer how do you get obese by consuming
too much carbohydrate in the diet
especially poorly nutritious
carbohydrates not complex carbohydrates
that you see in certain plants and in
certain grains but you get it from
consuming those foods that have minimal
nutritional value with high levels of
processed carbohydrates ifrop those corn
syrup and all these kinds of things they
are provocative just becoming obese
elevating blood sugar elevated blood
sugar is an accelerant to Growing tumor
so so clearly all of these things come
together and it's basically diet and
lifestyle yeah we also would like to
prevent cancer but when we have fast
food stores on every corner we have
Coca-Cola we have everything that's in
our environment that makes us feel good
we evolved as a species to love sweets
our brains are geared to love sweets and
we have sweets everywhere so it's again
it's my moderation we try to do what we
can do to moderate our consumption of
Highly processed carbohydrates and that
will reduce the risk for can not only
cancer but a lot of these diseases as
well I think you know the the truth as I
say at least is that many people are
really struggling right they do have
they either live in a food desert where
they can't get access to decent Foods
they're in poverty that they've had a
problematic relationship with food so I
I think on an individual level I think
that it's complex as to why so many
people are overweight certainly that's
my experience as a clinician
um but I think we can say as a society
we're not really putting this front and
center if if Government for example
really wanted to address
frankly Beyond reducing a risk of cancer
reducing our risk of obesity and type 2
diabetes
you know they could uh put in place a
lot more policies for example I don't
know make sure that there's uh
affordable healthy food for all of the
population make sure the food and
hospitals and schools is healthy and
health promoting rather than health
decimating we'll be back to the
conversation in just a moment now many
of us struggle to find time to eat all
of these incredible Whole Foods that's
why I'm a big fan of good quality Whole
Food supplements like this one that's
been in my own life for over three years
now it contains over 75 Whole Food
Source ingredients vitamins minerals pre
and probiotics and can help us support
our energy focused digestion and our
immune system 81 are giving my audience
a fantastic offer one year supply of
vitamin D and five free travel packs
with your first order you can see all
details at
drink81.com forward slash live more or
just click on the link below and now
back to the conversation right so I just
want to clarify that because I'm sure
you would agree oh you're 100 but you
know it's an industrial thing uh the
Food Industries are extremely powerful
uh they control Politics as well as the
pharmaceutical Industries yeah so you
have massively powerful Industries uh
that
um thrive on on on the health health
problems of the of the country and
you're right about food deserts and
people are stressed out and food makes
them feel better and a lot of that food
is full of carbohydrates that puts them
at risk for all these different diseases
but the governments could do a better
job but you know who are the governments
they're the congressmen Senators uh
these guys and they get money from these
different Industries to run their
campaigns and and they're not going to
come out and all of a sudden shout that
we have to reduce uh carbohydrates in
the diet to make our our population
healthier and the drug companies are
making money hand over fist yeah on on
all these crazy drugs that they're given
to people but I think it falls on our
shoulders ourselves now now I can I can
you're right I can speak from a
different perspective than the poor guy
who's living hand to mouth and his his
food can only be cheap Foods that's
poorly nutritious he can't afford the
garden variety of stuff that's more
generally more expensive grass-fed beef
and all this kind of stuff I mean so
you're caught in a you're caught in a
between a rock and a hard place yeah so
um yeah so these are difficult problems
yeah you need to be addressed and see
things I just wanted to finish up on
that
um as you mentioned earlier on in this
conversation
you can put on weight on a ketogenic
diet if you eat too much right so I
think processed carbs are absolutely uh
we're eating too much of them but but I
think people are losing weight on a
whole variety of different diets you
know I guess it's for me it's a question
of what what is the whole food-based
diet because I'm I'm interested in
weight loss and health promotion you can
technically eat 500 calories of garbage
each day and lose weight but I'm you
know if you have a whole food based diet
it's a case of What can you
do consistently that's going to help you
eat the right amounts well this is very
your point there's some recently within
the last month I think some guy lost 50
pounds eating only McDonald's food and
and you say wow how is that possible he
ate he would order something and eat
only half of it he he in other words he
did calorie restriction
he lost weight by just like said eating
eating food but I only had half the
amount that he normally would eat he
lost weight he he got he he felt good
but the other there was another guy who
ate as much as you could get super sized
meals this was about 10 or 12 years ago
and that guy within a month got
cardiovascular disease obesity and every
all the other so again it's the amount
and types of food that uh you are
addressing you keep your body in a in a
state and I think the key point there to
conclude is look obesity is a massive
risk factor
for cancer right that's not trying to
shame anyone that's not trying to have a
go at anyone it's just trying to look at
the science and and share it I think a
lot of people do not know that yeah I
agree by you stating that you have
informed whoever is listening that
obesity is a major risk factor for
cancer so
um and I think a lot of people aren't
aware of that and I think uh that by
that statement getting out in the world
uh makes people think twice uh about
their uh weight condition
Professor it's been a real Joy uh
talking to you I know you've been in
this field for for many decades now and
you're you're still banging the drum
you're trying to get people to see that
there's a
metabolic cause to cancer and that maybe
we need to
you know re-look at how we view cancer
and how we treat cancer there's plenty
more we haven't got to maybe I can tempt
you to a for a part two at some point in
the future I'm pretty sure my audience
are going to love this conversation but
just to finish off then
for people who've heard that and are
inspired to go okay I'm with you I can
see how poor metabolism metabolic
dysfunction mitochondrial dysfunction is
gonna increase my risk of getting cancer
what can I do right now I don't have
cancer but I want to reduce my risk of
getting in the future
I wonder if you could share some of your
top tips for people as to what they can
actually practically do well I think
exercise is absolutely essential
um keeping your because at bringing
oxygen into your blood having a good
blood flow increases uh physiological
function if you can reduce the amounts
of high carbohydrate foods that you eat
with exercise and occasionally look at
your gki your glucose Ketone index uh
you're going to ward off not only cancer
but probably type 2 diabetes
cardiovascular disease and even dementia
so uh all of these things are linked to
a common problem in in Disturbed
metabolic homeostasis so um so I think
there are definitely things people can
do and it's hard when you're sitting in
traffic uh traffic jams and then you
have to rush up and sit in front of your
computer or in an office somewhere so
all of these things are not consistent
with our evolutionary origins but I
think if people become aware of these
things at least they can in their own
lives try to adjust adjust their uh
their their situation to to to recognize
this and sleep chronic stress these sort
of things well that's another thing too
sleeping you know good sleep yeah right
who wouldn't like to have that yeah
stress what do you do for stress you
know I mean we're all stressed out
people were used to smoke like crazy to
reduce stress now they stopped smoking
and now they got fat and now they got
this they're back in the same spot for a
different reason so uh you know it's
just it's just um but but the but the
point is is that all of these things
really do make a real difference at
reducing your risk of cancer in the
future yeah absolutely absolutely and
maybe this is just a little teaser for
the next time we talk you mentioned
earlier on the intermittent hypoxia is
one of the things that can drive the
mitochondrial dysfunction I wanted to
really explain what you meant by that
did you mean obstructive sleep apnea
things like that because you also
because you then mentioned exercise as
being a way of delivering more oxygen
right you don't know that's what Warburg
even showed that it was intermittent
hypoxia that he thought was responsible
for the majority of cancers we've
expanded upon that and we've shown the
mechanisms by which that can happen so
yeah that's another story I'm mean we've
done we've done a lot of research and
and we recognize these things and and
intermittent hypoxia can be prevented by
by uh oxygenation and exercise and
eating the right Foods so again you're
coming back to a similar kind of thing
well we'll get to that in our next
conversation hopefully but just to
finish off then are you hopeful are you
hopeful that we can do something
different to make an impact in our rates
of cancer oh absolutely I mean
absolutely and Warburg even said that we
could reduce 80 percent of our Cancers
and I believe that if we but now we we
have a plan we know what's going on we
have an understanding of the mechanism
by which cancer occurs and we really
understand how we can manage it the
problem is getting that to be adapted in
the uh in the clinics and and the
education that requires uh in the
medical schools uh to train the
physician that diet lifestyle issues are
really important for managing uh chronic
diseases and here is the strategy and
and protocols for doing that and that's
I think will be the future well
Professor thank you for your tireless
work thank you for giving up some time
thank you for coming on the show yeah
very nice thank you very much for having
me
if you enjoyed that conversation I think
you are really going to enjoy this one
about the four common causes of
decreased longevity and what we can do
about it today we're at a point where
not only is life expectancy flattened
but in many parts of the developed world
it's actually declining a little bit and
more importantly quality at the end of
life is going down the question is why